There is a battle
that has lasted for centuries
and continues down to our day.
It’s a battle of wills
—the will of disobedient humans
who fight against Jehovah’s will.
Rather than submitting
or surrendering their will
to do Jehovah’s will, most humans refuse
to make peace with him,
becoming peacebreakers.
On the other hand,
millions throughout the centuries
have humbly submitted to Jehovah’s will,
making his will their will.
They are known as peacemakers.
By sowing peace with Jehovah,
they have reaped the benefits of having
a close, personal friendship with him
and the wonderful hope of living forever
in a peaceful new world.
Even so, we must admit
that it can be difficult at times to accept
and then follow Jehovah’s direction
or direction that we may receive
from his organization,
especially if we don’t understand
the reasons behind the direction
or it’s not what we might prefer.
What is needed to sow and reap peace?
Humility.
Humility is defined as a “lowliness of mind,
freedom from pride or arrogance.”
A humble person is not self-willed,
but they actively look for ways to sow peace
with Jehovah and others.
He’s known as a peacemaker.
What is the result of humility
and sowing peace?
Notice what Proverbs 22:4 says:
“The result of humility
and the fear of Jehovah
“is [reaping, notice] riches
and glory and life.”
Yes, everlasting life.
The Bible contains many fine examples
of those who sowed and reaped peace
by humbly submitting to Jehovah’s will.
Let’s consider the example of the Gibeonites.
The Gibeonites
—weren’t they enemies of the Israelites?
Yes.
So how did they humbly sow and reap peace
with Jehovah and with his people?
As you recall,
after Joshua led the Israelites
across the Jordan River
into the Promised Land,
Jehovah directed them to remove
the pagan Canaanite nations
who dwelled there.
This included the Gibeonites.
The account at Joshua chapter 9
informs us that the Gibeonites
were plainly told
that it was Jehovah’s will
that the Canaanites be annihilated.
Israel’s stunning victories
over Jericho and Ai
made it very clear that Jehovah
was fighting for his people,
and the Gibeonites did not want to be next.
But what could they do
if this was Jehovah’s will?
Well, they devised an interesting plan.
They sent representatives to seek peace
with the Israelites and thereby with Jehovah.
According to verse 11, they were instructed:
“We will be your servants;
now make a covenant with us.”
So this is what they were
to say as representatives.
Verse 4 says that the Gibeonites
“acted shrewdly”
by trying to trick the Israelites
with their worn-out clothing and provisions,
pretending that they had traveled
from a very distant land
but were actually just 20 miles (30 km) away.
Did their plan work?
Despite their deception,
yes, their plan was successful.
In fact, in verse 15,
Joshua made a covenant of peace
with the Gibeonites.
Evidently, this was in harmony
with Jehovah’s will
and reflected their humility
and desire to seek peace
with Him and his people.
They demonstrated
their humility and submission
to Jehovah’s will
and his representative, Joshua,
by following whatever direction
they received.
In fact, notice the direction at verse 27;
it says: “Joshua made them gatherers of wood
and drawers of water for the assembly
and for Jehovah’s altar.”
Although the Gibeonite men
were likely skilled warriors,
they were happy and content
to do whatever work
they were given to support pure worship.
Humbly following direction
saved their lives and brought them peace.
How can we imitate the Gibeonites?
By bringing our lives into harmony
with Jehovah’s will.
For some, this may require
making big changes,
adjusting their thinking,
giving up harmful practices,
and avoiding bad associates.
We can also imitate the Gibeonites
by being willing
to perform whatever assignments we are given
to humbly support pure worship.
So the lesson is clear.
Sowing and reaping peace
requires humbly following direction.
This lesson is highlighted
in the following dramatization.
Notice the benefits of submitting
to Jehovah’s direction.
You see,
the pandemic lasted longer
than any of us expected,
and all the conflicting news reports
just added to the stress.
Then my sister lost her job
and had to move in with us.
So, yeah, it was me
and Kelly, Nicole, and Dad.
Twenty seconds, Son
—twenty seconds.
I’ll see you later.
Yeah.
Uh, where’s your mask?
Don’t worry.
Here, you can use this one.
I won’t get near anyone.
Gary.
Listen!
Nobody at the warehouse is wearing masks.
And do you know how many people
have actually gotten sick?
Zero.
So far.
You saw the last Governing Body update.
We can’t let down our guard.
Not now.
Dad, I get it.
OK?
Look, I think it’s great that the brothers
are trying to keep us safe.
But . . .
But what?
Don’t you think that they’re,
you know, overreacting?
But, of course, it wasn’t
the brothers who had the problem.
It was me.
A week later, I found out that a friend
in our service group
was in the hospital with COVID-19.
He was young, and he had been taking
all the right precautions.
I had really let my guard down.
Now is not the time
to slacken our hand when it comes to safety.
Don’t let your guard down.
Don’t think the virus
can’t affect you or your family.
I saw how the organization
was really trying to protect us
and how much my decisions
were affecting others,
including the people I love the most.
As the pandemic dragged on,
I learned the importance
of being humble and obedient.
Following Jehovah’s direction
didn’t just help us stay safe,
it brought us peace.
What timely lessons,
especially with all that we are facing today!
Like Gary, there are times
that we may need
to adjust our thinking on matters
and put aside our personal opinions
and preferences
so we can loyally
and humbly follow Jehovah’s direction
or whatever direction we receive
from his representatives,
“the faithful and discreet slave.”
Gary learned an important lesson:
Humbly following direction
doesn’t just help our family stay safe,
it brings us happiness and peace
—a vital lesson for us today.
What can help us
to humbly follow direction now
as well as in the future?
Note what the apostle Paul said
at Ephesians 5:17;
he says: “Stop being unreasonable,
“but keep perceiving
what the will of Jehovah is.”
The Bible clearly shows
God’s thinking on matters.
But what if it’s not so clear to us
or we struggle to fully grasp
how it applies to us personally
or in a given situation?
What did Paul advise?
He said: “Keep perceiving
what the will of Jehovah is.”
How can we do that?
Well, just as a miner keeps digging
deep below the surface of the ground
to find precious gems,
we must look beyond the surface
of what we read in the Bible.
This requires that we keep digging deep,
carefully searching for gems
in the form of Bible principles.
Then we must prayerfully meditate
on what we find.
Then Jehovah’s precious thoughts
will become our thoughts.
Perceiving Jehovah’s thinking on matters
will help us to avoid getting
into a battle of wills,
so we can follow His direction
or whatever direction we receive
from the Governing Body.
Like the Gibeonites, may we be peacemakers
by continuing to sow peace
with Jehovah and his people.
As we humbly make Jehovah’s will our will,
we will joyfully reap abundant peace forever.
Brother Kenneth Flodin,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now consider
the next talk of this symposium,
“How They Sowed and Reaped Peace
—Gideon.”